.TH GIT-SNAPSHOT 1 "July 16, 2026" "git-snapshot" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
git-snapshot \- capture working-tree snapshots outside branch history
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git-snapshot
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B git snapshot
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git-snapshot
stores working-tree states as a verified linear commit stream under a dedicated
ref (default
.BR refs/snapshots/default ).
It uses a private temporary index and does not change HEAD, branches, the real
index, or the working tree during capture.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B create
Capture the worktree. Options: \fB--message\fR, \fB--message-file\fR,
\fB--allow-in-progress\fR, \fB--allow-dirty-submodules\fR, and
\fB--dry-run\fR.
.TP
.B list
List newest first. Options: \fB--limit\fR, \fB--reverse\fR,
\fB--format\fR, \fB--show-ref\fR, \fB--show-base\fR, and
\fB--show-size\fR.
.TP
.B show [selector]
Show metadata and optionally \fB--stat\fR, \fB--name-only\fR, or
\fB--patch\fR. Also: \fB--format\fR and \fB--allow-unreachable\fR.
.TP
.B diff [from] [to]
Compare snapshots; destination may be HEAD or worktree. Output options are
\fB--stat\fR, \fB--name-only\fR, or \fB--patch\fR (default).
.TP
.B verify [selector]
Verify one snapshot or the complete stream.
.TP
.B restore [selector]
Restore safely with \fB--destination\fR, or explicitly use
\fB--worktree\fR. Options: \fB--overwrite\fR, \fB--force\fR,
\fB--staged\fR, \fB--dry-run\fR, and \fB--allow-unreachable\fR.
.TP
.B drop
After confirmation, move back by \fB--count\fR (default 1) while leaving at
least one snapshot. Use delete to remove a complete stream.
.TP
.B delete
After confirmation, delete the exact selected stream ref.
.TP
.B config get|set|unset|list
Read or write known snapshot keys. Scopes: \fB--global\fR,
\fB--local\fR, and \fB--file\fR. Other options: \fB--repo\fR,
\fB--effective\fR, \fB--show-origin\fR, and \fB--json\fR.
.TP
.B help, version, --version
Display help or version.
.SH SELECTORS
Selectors are \fBlatest\fR, a non-negative first-parent distance (0 is
newest), or a full SHA-1/SHA-256 object ID. Full IDs outside the stream require
\fB--allow-unreachable\fR where offered and must still be CLI-owned for the
selected ref.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
Commands except config accept \fB--repo\fR, \fB--ref\fR,
\fB--namespace\fR, \fB--base\fR, \fB--include-untracked\fR,
\fB--no-include-untracked\fR, \fB--include-ignored\fR,
\fB--no-include-ignored\fR, \fB--create-reflog\fR,
\fB--no-create-reflog\fR, \fB--message-template\fR, \fB--sign\fR,
\fB--no-sign\fR, \fB--signing-key\fR, \fB--output-format\fR,
\fB--color\fR, \fB--yes\fR, \fB--restore-destination\fR,
\fB--retention\fR, \fB--lock-timeout\fR, \fB--config-file\fR,
\fB--json\fR, \fB--quiet\fR, and \fB--verbose\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Precedence from low to high: defaults, explicit file, global Git config, local
Git config, environment, command-line flags. The explicit file
(\fB--config-file\fR or \fBGIT_SNAPSHOT_CONFIG_FILE\fR) is intentionally the
lowest configuration layer.
.PP
Keys and defaults: snapshot.repo (.), snapshot.ref (refs/snapshots/default),
snapshot.namespace (refs/snapshots/), snapshot.base (HEAD),
snapshot.includeUntracked (true), snapshot.includeIgnored (false),
snapshot.createReflog (true), snapshot.messageTemplate
(git-snapshot: {createdAt}), snapshot.sign (false), snapshot.signingKey (empty),
snapshot.outputFormat (human), snapshot.color (auto), snapshot.yes (false),
snapshot.restoreDestination (empty), snapshot.retention (0),
snapshot.lockTimeout (5s), and snapshot.defaultCommand (create).
.PP
Environment names are \fBGIT_SNAPSHOT_\fR followed by REPO, REF, NAMESPACE,
BASE, INCLUDE_UNTRACKED, INCLUDE_IGNORED, CREATE_REFLOG, MESSAGE_TEMPLATE, SIGN,
SIGNING_KEY, OUTPUT_FORMAT, COLOR, YES, RESTORE_DESTINATION, RETENTION,
LOCK_TIMEOUT, or DEFAULT_COMMAND.
.SH SAFETY
Ignored files are excluded by default. Including them warns and confirms because
secrets may persist in Git objects. Dry-run capture may write blobs and trees,
but no commit or ref. Retention is a maximum length: create refuses at the
limit and never automatically rewrites history. Ref updates use
expected-old-value compare-and-swap. Worktree restore previews, requires force
when destructive, and can be partially applied on filesystem failure.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 success; 1 operational failure; 2 usage/configuration; 3 safety refusal;
4 not found; 5 concurrency/lock; 6 verification failure.
.SH FILES
.I completions/git-snapshot.bash
.br
.I completions/_git-snapshot
.br
.I completions/git-snapshot.fish
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR git-update-ref (1),
.BR git-commit-tree (1)
